this video is going to talk a little bit
about how subsidies to the dairy
industry work and I'm in Canada
remarkably if you're watching this video
anywhere in the world that has access to
the internet and electricity it's one
the odds are that everything i would say
about canadian dairy subsidies applies
to your country as well the way that the
dairy industry is subsidised in canada
the united kingdom and the united states
is remarkably similar and if you study
the history of the legal changes in
those three countries you'll see that
they've become more similar over time
all three of those countries have
influenced the laws and standards of
practices around the world there are
third world countries that simply
directly imitate the United States in
their dairy policy and their
agricultural policy generally in their
economic development policy this is most
dramatically happened probably with
chicken farming where the American model
of industrialized you know battery cage
the the terrible disgusting system of
having chickens live in a steel cage
their whole lives this was really
developed the United States along with
new breeds of chickens and exporter in
the world uh with how the dairy industry
operates you have to remember government
bureaucrats in general are not paid to
come up with new ideas even if they're
intelligent people who could be
innovating new in different ways to do
things they are on the one hand
profoundly conservative in that they're
paid to keep things the same keep things
coming in under budget and on the other
hand if anyone in the Canadian
government ever asks what should we do
about dairy industry the first thing
they're gonna think of is oh well how
did the Americans do it how did the
British to it how of the Americans
change their standards of practices in
the last 20 years and they will
commissioned a report a study that looks
at how things have changed these other
countries look look it called at
comparable examples around the world and
then think about how can the Canadian
system budge a little bit this way or
that way
so in that sense it's not a conspiracy
but internationally one basic model of
dairy subsidy and production has been
massively influential and massively
imitated even if it's not really
successful or effective the reason why
any government would engage in a
conspiracy is the need for secrecy and
it sounds crazy whenever you talk about
politics in terms of a conspiracy a lot
of things sound crazy but historically
they're true if you're under the age of
30 you've grown up your whole life with
the Taliban being referred to as an
enemy of the United States of America if
you're over 50 years old you can
remember time and let the Taliban the
United States are on the same side
fighting against Soviet Union sounds
crazy but it's true come back to my
point if i say to you dairy prices are
controlled by government conspiracy in
canada that sounds crazy uh in one sense
it's not a conspiracy because we do have
newspaper articles talking about the
facts as they unfold on the other hand
when you deal with what the government
itself directly says and promises it is
indeed secret and they even deny
directly what it is they're doing
because what they're doing is illegal
under international law under
international trade agreements so in
general whatever the government decides
to do is legal because the government
writes the laws so it is very rare that
a government program will be illegal in
its own country however countries get
involved with international trade
agreements organizations like the WTO
and they can rule that laws and
standards and practices in a country are
illegal Canada's whole system of dairy
subsidy was declared illegal by the
World Trade Organization in 1999 so the
government Canada tried to change the
way they do business it was declared
illegal again in here too
send it to and if you think things have
changed dramatically since 2002 know the
hell so the Government of Canada knows
that a lot of what it's doing is illegal
and that they could be hauled into a
court or a tribunal at any time and face
further consequences for what's going on
in the dairy industry and this is not
because a bunch of vegans or idealistic
ecologists or criticizing the Canadian
government and hauling it into court no
this is just about money have you heard
of money it's popular a lot of people
care about it there is a conspiracy and
I will explain why this is a conspiracy
right now in Canada to make pizza
cheaper and you know it is a funny thing
but in most of the big cities in Canada
pizza really is the food of the poor you
can still find 99-cent pizza slices and
two dollar pizza slices um in a country
where you cannot buy a chocolate bar for
one dollar anymore where one dollar
Canadian is really not worth very much
anymore certainly not relative to food
prices and you might raise an eyebrow
and wonder why that is well believe it
or not the Canadian government has a
special conspiracy to make pizza cheaper
specifically mozzarella used for pizza
has a special pricing scheme and a
special subsidy but the Government of
Canada can never use the word subsidy
and this is quite complex every pizza
restaurant in Canada has to sign an
agreement with the government sign a
legal document in order to receive this
benefit in order to have taxpayers make
pizza cheaper in pizza restaurants from
coast to coast so thousands and
thousands of pizza restaurants have
signed up for this I have no idea why I
doubt there's a single pizza restaurant
in Canada that on point of moral
principle says no I'm not going to waste
taxpayers money to make myself wealthier
and make my product cheaper I'm
providing the link to this document
where you sign up in the description
this video
if you look at section 15.1 of the legal
document that every pizza restaurant in
Canada signs it clarifies for you that
what the Canadian government is doing is
not a rebate is not a special price and
is not a reduced price for mozzarella
cheese and that is exactly what the
agreement is okay and newspapers have
reported on it I'll provide some other
links newspapers and magazines here have
discussed the strange fact that the
continued the Canadian government set up
this weird agreement to make pizza
cheaper in this country and this this is
not for all dairy products not for all
milk specifically mozzarella pizza
cheese is cheaper Canada FERC due to
this program the reasons for that have
to do with both this strange structure
of trade disputes and also the threat
that through a special loophole in our
trading room with the United States
cheaper pizza cheese was being imported
into Canada and a sort of gray area of
the rules that a Court did rule on and
say look it's acceptable American
companies can import pizza cheese in
this particular way especially packaging
the pizza cheese as a pizza kit and then
the Canadian dairy board didn't want to
have to compete with these American
cheese producers at a lower price blah
blah blah so again it's not because I d
these people have an ethical objection
to cattle living their whole lives
basically in a steel cage on a concrete
floor living in misery being impregnated
with a sterile needle being separated
from their infants shortly after they're
born the infant's being turned into veal
etc etc no no no this is not due to any
more electrum it's about money but it is
surreal I mean if you signed a document
saying that you were joining the
Canadian military don't you think it
would be strange that document said you
are in no way employed by the Canadian
military that would be a secret
agreement it might even specify you're
not going to admit to the public that
you work for the Canadian military so
you'd be entering into a kind of
conspiracy
mercy why would the Canadian government
sign an agreement with every pizza
restaurant in Canada where the soul
exclusive purpose of this agreement is
to provide you with cheaper cheese and
yet you have to agree in signing this
that the purpose of agreement is not not
at all to provide youth cheaper cheap
the whole program only exists for that
reason well the Canadian government as I
mentioned that the big dates were 1999
2002 they've been dragged into court
again and again and most of these again
it's not a court in a simple sense
they're tribunals but like the regular
court system a lot of the time the way
government settle these matters is by
making a deal outside of court if you
live in Canada you have seen many times
the strange sight of advertisements for
New Zealand butter New Zealand dairy
products are common in Canada why is it
because New Zealand can produce butter
more cheaply than Mexico is it because
New Zealand can make butter more cheaply
and export Canada better price in
competition with Argentina Brazil no
that's the exact opposite of the truth
if we had a free market trade in dairy
and beef everyone in Canada would be
eating beef and drinking milk from South
America the industry within Canada would
collapse and the taxpayers would save a
ton of money because they would no
longer be subsidizing the most polluting
corrupt immoral industries imaginable
and although I am vegan I'm not going to
start drinking milk or eating beef if we
start importing it from Argentina in
many ways you have to say there would be
less entanglement it would be less of a
moral quandary if the Canadian
government just open up the borders and
let that happen but no no why is news
eland butter the product and the shelves
in Canada because of a 100-percent
corrupt somewhat secretive somewhat
conspiratorial deal that the Canadian
government negotiated with the new
zealand government so that new zealand
would agree to stop having its lawyers
press their case in the World Trade
Organization cord New Zealand has a
similar British colonial history to
Canada they understand the laws in
Canada very well they understand the
rules the world trade organization and
they were simply the country that had
the hood spot to take their lawyers and
press the case against canada to to
persecute or prosecute canada or you
want to look at it and say you guys are
breaking the rules and we know we can
make money out of punishing you for
breaking through on how you stuff money
into the pockets of dairy farm okay the
situation is to some extent the same in
England in the United States the United
States is their dairy systems actually
better managed one of the indirect
effects of how all these countries
subsidize dairy prices is also that all
of these countries import a deluxe
expensive dairy products from countries
like France and Italy that otherwise
they wouldn't import if France and Italy
had to compete with dramatically cheaper
products from Argentina it would be a
different situation but they don't we
have cheese that comes from France and
is important to Canada and all it has to
compete with is overly expensive
Canadian cheese so the prices are very
competitive even though French cheese
should be much more expensive in canada
than a cheese that's made in canada it's
not the scene is true basically with
competition between the united states
and canada which as you can imagine was
negotiated in great depth over many
years as to how can the united states
we're going to cope with their separate
and equal corrupt systems of
derry subsidy okay coming back the
question I raised the beginning this
video oh I grew up in Canada I heard
many times just in conversation people
claiming that the government made dairy
cheaper that the government was
promoting dairy farmers and subsidizing
dairy and free to make milk cheaper
however the minute you start reading any
kind of detailed article on this subject
whether it's in a magazine and newspaper
what have you you find claims normally
backed up with economic statistics that
the effect of the government subsidies
is actually to raise prices to make milk
more expensive for the consumer um so
again in almost any country in the world
where you might be watching this video
what I'm about to say is going to be
true it's true in England it's true
nited states from canada with only
slight differences today the main effect
of government subsidy is to stabilize
prices and this has dramatic knock-on
effects really throughout our whole
society naturally in a free market in
some kind of intact ecosystem the price
of milk would be very unstable Canada is
a cold country it's cold as hell in the
winter do you think we would naturally
produce the same amount of milk 12
months a year year in and year out no we
don't produce the same amount of wheat
the same amount of corn 12 months a year
right naturally they're going to be big
variations with temperature with the
weather with the harvest season
ultimately with the cycle of life for
the cattle who are not absolutely
continuously pregnant this is a horrible
system of impregnating them repeatedly
and so on and so forth if you're vegan
you already know if you don't already
know check out a short documentary like
from farm to fridge you can behold the
horrors of the modern industrialized
area system the main impact of
government subsidy is to even out is to
create an artificially constant price
for all dairy products and that is
fundamentally why if you go to a corner
store
derry is in everything if the supply was
uneven was inconsistent if sometimes you
could get dairy and sometimes you
couldn't as a as an industry as a
manufacturer even if it were cheaper on
average that would mean that you
couldn't really consistently rely on
milk solids and other dairy products to
go into chocolate bars and candy and I
don't know toothpaste I mean dairy is
used in manufacturing an unbelievable
array of products in the modern Western
world and most of them don't need it you
know it's you know as a vegan you used
to this you read the labels on things
and you figure out just how many crazy
products have dairy add to them often a
desiccated milk powder milk solids milk
fat milk protein so that's the big knock
on effect in America Canada Britain and
in all the countries that imitated our
system is that a product that naturally
would be perishable milk doesn't keep
for very long in consistently available
and would naturally have a fluctuating
price instead is orderly artificially
made into having a very consistent
predictable price and then later stages
of industry all find ways to make use of
it with this reassurance that the price
will be the same in summer as in winter
and that their access to this product is
going to be mathematically predictable
in Canada most of the time the effect of
dairy subsidy is actually to make milk
more expensive for the consumer so again
that's different from the effect for the
owner of a chocolate factory or some
other you know manufacturer producing
things out of dairy products but yes you
can look at the price charts we have a
straight line for the imposed price that
the Canadian government creates and
where you can look at when the world
price as it's called would be higher or
lower than that now the problem is the
world price includes places like
Argentina you can also look at American
prices you can look at kind of
theoretical prices of if we just had
free
trade from the United States and Canada
etc um uh in in the last 30 years almost
all the time uh the for the end consumer
dairy would be cheaper you did have some
periods of time where the world price
spiked up above and then dropped again
but most of the time would be cheaper
however the reason why I made the point
about it being more reliable this way is
even more important if we really lived
in a world without government subsidy
without government interference in how
dairy production works then we would
live in a world where sometimes your
grandmother would go to the store and
ask for milk and they would say we don't
have any especially if you lived in a
small town in Canada you know Toronto is
our biggest city probably Toronto would
have dairy products all the time in
there a free market but if you got out
into smaller towns into Collingwood into
Kitimat into a de wapis cat some of
those places would probably have no milk
at all or they'd only have milk once in
a while or probably people who wanted to
drink milk would tell the guy at the
store oh the next time you get milk can
you give me a phone call can you send me
an email and of course if you read just
historical fiction any kind of history
whether it's novels and nonfiction in
most countries in Europe not too long
ago not too many centuries ago that was
the way milk was regarded even if you
live near dairy farms it doesn't come
with mathematical regularity sometimes
available snows is not and that's
another reason why in the pre-modern
world we didn't have all of these
industries relying on dairy all the time
okay my final point is what's the point
of abolishing dairy subsidies apart from
saving money for the taxpayer which is
something that the left-wing the right
wing and everybody in between can agree
is a good idea the most fundamental
benefit whether you're vegan or not
whether you're a meat eater and a milk
drinker or not is that when you
disentangle
government from industry you get better
accountability for both government and
industry when the government is making
money by propping up industry and what
industry is making money by exploiting
the government neither party is really
going to do the right thing they're not
going to do the right thing for
consumers they're not going to do the
right thing for the cows not going to do
the right thing for the environment and
they're not even going to do the right
thing in terms of business sense and
being the most efficient most optimized
way to produce dairy products going it
would not be a utopian dream to imagine
that in the future countries like the
United States and Canada simply get rid
of the enormously wasteful enormously
expensive bureaucracy that currently
props up the local dairy industry and
that they accept the fact that guess
what I mean Quebec is cold as hell in
winter and people in Quebec import
cheese from France because France makes
some of the best cheese in the world
ain't nobody in France importing cheese
from Canada right if we got rid of these
sorts of controls then naturally
Canadians would on the one hand import
dairy products from the countries that
can produce them the most cheaply which
would not be Canada it would be South
America and Latin America and the other
hand would import dairy products from
countries that produce them at the
highest standard of excellence so France
and Italy but guess what overall dairy
consumption would decline access to
dairy products would become more natural
in a free market sense of the price
rising and falling and consistently
availability not being 365 days a year
etc Dairy would become a luxury product
again instead of something that people
are expected to eat three meals a day at
a very low level of quote